The final TypeScript language
feature that I think is of
the most important ones to people
writing everyday TypeScript
code is another great one,
checked index access.
So if you've taken my
TypeScript Fundamentals course,
you may have heard me go on rant
about dictionaries, and arrays, and
how if we typed dictionaries like this,
we're being way too optimistic.
So you can see here, we're saying,
I have a collection where I
store string arrays under keys.
Great, so
let's create an empty dictionary.
And then what the type system seems to
think is completely okay is I'm just gonna
pass in a key that I know doesn't
exist in this data structure.
And it's letting me go ahead and act as if
there's a string array that I get back.
There's no sense of the dictionary
might not have a value for me, right?
There's no sense of is
there something present?
Let's make sure we check first.
So what you may have seen me suggest that
you do is something like this down here,
where you always add this undefined.
In your types, you be honest, and
you describe that
the possibility exists for
there to be nothing under
some subset of keys.
In fact,
the vast majority of keys hold nothing,
the vast majority of possible
strings in the universe, right?
And so here we get an appropriate
type error, right?
There is no rhubarb in this
empty dictionary here.
So we're told, look,
you should probably check this out first.
Just give me a truthy, falsy check.
We could do this.
We could handle it very gracefully here.
We'd just have to do const
= d, and
then if (rhubarb),
we just need to use a type guard,
and then we can narrow that down.
So we'd just have to do something like
this, which is absolutely the right thing
to do when we're not sure
whether something's there.
So here you can see the possibility for
something to be undefined exists.
And down here, it does not,
because of the type guard.
So what we get here, and unfortunately,
I cannot show it to you in
these little code snippets,
because we do not have the technology yet
to turn this compiler flag on for
some examples, and not for others.
You get a compiler flag that
says noUncheckedIndexAccess.
And here's what that means.
If I click this link down here, So here,
I do have this compiler flag turned on.
Let me make sure I'm not lying, no.
There it is,
noUncheckedIndexAccess, great.
So now we can see that when I get rhubarb
back, there is the possibility that
it's undefined, even though I have
not explicitly said so up here.
So this will be the case for arrays,
and for dictionaries, or objects.
Anywhere you have an index signature,
there is an assumption that
there might be nothing here.
If we look at an example
of how this is applied,
we have a compiler option turned on here.
It's called noUcheckedIndexAccess.
There it is.
It's checked off.
That means it's enabled.
And even though we have not
up here explicitly said T or
undefined, we are getting
an equivalent result here.
We can see that when we grab the value
stored under a particular key,
object is possibly undefined.
And this encourages us to use some
sort of guard, or optional chaining,
depending on what you're doing,
in order to address that possibility,
rather than running smack into the error
of cannot call function join on undefined,
which will happen at runtime.
The whole point is to
avoid that kind of thing.
That's why we use TypeScript, right?
Now, there is a little bit
of a downside to this, and
that would be dealing with arrays.
So when we're using higher order functions
on arrays or dictionaries, if you use
something like Lodash, you might be
used to doing something like this.
Oops, sorry.
So we could do that, and then, We get
a value out, see string or undefined.
Great, this has been fixed.
So now, because in this situation, right,
when we're looping over this array,
there is some checking that
happens behind the scenes, right?
We're not trying to access a value at
a particular key, we're saying for
every value that is found,
invoke this callback.
That's what I'm gonna
use to transform things.
So actually,
I see no downside here anymore.
But it used to be that this value
was string or undefined, and
this would require that you either
filter the array beforehand, or
do some checking within
this little callback.
But now, all of the higher order functions
that you would expect to be invoked on
a per member basis, you will already
have that undefinedness kind
of worked out of the type, and
this should behave as usual.
Great, I love finding
surprise lack of downsides.